# lapis-eswidget

This library provides a base Widget class that enables aggregation of static
JavaScript code and a unified system for initializing a widget with JavaScript
code.

A command-line tool is included for compiling a widget modules into an ES
Module that can be used in a build system like [esbuild](https://esbuild.github.io/).

## Example

```moonscript
-- widgets/my_widget.moon
class MyWidget extends require "lapis.eswidget"
  @asset_packages: {"main"}

  @es_module: [[
    import CoolThing from "./cool_thing"
    new CoolThing(widget_selector)
  ]]

  inner_content: =>
    div "Hi"

```

Extracting the module code on the command line:

```bash
lapis-eswidget compile_js --module widgets.my_widget
```

Extracting module code in code:

```moonscript
MyWidget = require("widgets.my_widget")

print MyWidget\compile_es_module!
```

Building an entire package the module code on the command line:

> Note: You generally want to use `generate_spec` to create instructions to
> build a package incrementally. --package mode may be slow since it will scan
> and evaluate the entire widget filesystem tree

```bash
lapis-eswidget compile_js --package main
```

## `lapis-eswidget` command line tool

The `lapis-eswidget` command can be used to work with widget modules,
extracting code or generating instructions to create the final bundles.

The following commands are included

### `compile_js`

```
lapis-eswidget compile_js --help
```

Compile a single module or entire package to JavaScript. One of the following
sources must be specified:

* `--file` - Load by the filename of a Lua module that contains an ESWidget (eg. `views/profile.lua`)
* `--module` - Load by Lua module name (eg. `views.profile`)
* `--package` - Will scan filesystem (see `--widget-dirs`) and concatenate the output of all lua modules that extend ESWidget and specify the package in `@asset_packages`

If you want to enable loading MoonScript modules then you must pass `--moonscript`

### `generate_spec`

```
lapis-eswidget generate_spec --help
```

Scan directories for widgets that extend from `ESWidget` and generate a
specification for compiling bundles. This intermediate file is called an *Asset Spec*.

Supports the following output formats: `json`, `tup`, `makefile`

### `debug`

```
lapis-eswidget debug --help
```

Display information about a single widget

## `ESWidget` base class

Any widgets you wish to be supported by this library must extend from
`ESWidget`.


```moonscript
ESWidget = require "lapis.eswidget"
```

### Static vs Instance code

There are two kinds of data assoaciated with each widget during it's render
lifecycle:

**Static** code and data is unchanging and can be compiled and used during the
ahead-of-time building of packages. This includes things like the ES Module
initializatioon function (`@@es_module`), CSS classnames.

**Instance** code and data is only available during the rendering of a widget
during a request. This could include things like the dynamically created widget
ID to uniquely referencing its element on a page, parameters to JavaScript
initialization.

### HTML Encapsulation

The `ESWidget` class provides a default `content` method that will
automatically generate a class and ID for an HTML element to allow it to be
uniquely identified by JavaScript initializion, and generally identified by CSS
selectors.

To user encapsulation, the `inner_content` method must be implemented instead
of the `content` method on the widget sub-class, otherwise the enclosing
element logic will be overwritten.

The generated class names will utilize the entire class hierachy:

```
class One extends require "lapis.eswidget"
class Two extends One
class Three extends Two


One\class_list! --> 
Two\class_list! --> 
Three\class_list! --> 
```

### Parameter Validation

TODO: `render_types` and `prop_types`

### Asset Packages

The `asset_packages` class field is an array of package names that a widget's
assets should be aggregated into when bundling. No asset package names are set
by default, if you wish to aggregate assets then you will need to provide at
least one asset package.

The end result of bundling will result in a file (or files) containing output
from widgets that target that package, eg `main` → `main.js`, `main.css`

Multiple asset packages can be used for splitting code at a high level to
reduce total bundle sizes.

The first asset package in the list of asset packages is used to calculate the
canonical path for Associated Files (see below).

### Associated Files

An associated file is a file related to the widget that is manually written (as
opposed to generated by the build system). These files have code
implementations of logic that is too big to be placed directly into the Widget
class declaration.

The naming convention is: 

`/static/{asset_type}/{asset_package}/{widget_path}.{ext}`

* Where `asset_type` is like `css`, `js`, `scss`, `coffee` etc.
* Where `asset_package` is the first package specified by the widget, like `main`, `admin`, etc. (Packages are user-defined and can be anything)
* Where `widget_path` the conversion of the widget's module name to a path, like `widgets.hello.world` -> `hello/world` (Note the module prefix is not included)
* And `ext` is the appropriate extension for the file

